DOCS-651: Fix and update mock robot tutorial (#1165)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/configure/build-a-mock-robot.md

tags: ["mock", "simulation"]
---

This tutorial will show you how to build a mock robot using just your personal laptop so you can:

  - learn how to [configure](../../../manage/configuration/) robots with Viam and

>  - try using [Viam](/viam) without any robotic hardware.

Author: ```suggestion
  - try using [Viam](/viam) without any robotic hardware.
```

Most Viam [components](../../../components/) have a _fake_ model that you can use for testing.

> These fake components interact with Viam like real hardware but do not actually exist.

Reviewer: here I think it's worth giving more info about finding API call specifications (in github and on model pages) & the limitations of these right now-- I think I've seen some discussion about engineering is unsure about supporting full component functionality for fake models, and have seen some of them are more advanced with configuration & capabilities for testing API methods than others (for example, fake `arm` vs a fake `base`) 

At the least you could add in a sentence or two here directing to the fake component pages, even though they are mentioned below!

Author: Hmmm interesting. I'm hesitant to add any words about the extent to which different methods are or aren't supported if eng is still unsure about it such that it is inconsistent and may be in flux. 

RE directing them to fake component pages, I am hopeful that with the added link to components above, people who are very curious will click through and see them. If not, as you say they're linked below. I don't think adding links here will help since that's just config info, and we're about to tell them how to configure things so they should just keep reading and they'll get the info when they need it, in context.

tags: ["mock", "simulation"]
---

This tutorial will show you how to build a mock robot using just your personal laptop so you can try using [Viam](/viam) without any robotic hardware.
This is a great way to learn how to [configure](../../../manage/configuration/) robots with Viam.

> Most Viam [components](../../../components/) have a _fake_ model that can be useful when testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Most Viam [components](../../../components/) have a _fake_ model that you can use for testing.
```

Reviewer 2: (speak to the user)

> These fake components interact with Viam like real hardware, but of course, do not actually exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These fake components interact with Viam like real hardware but do not actually exist.
```

> You'll use these fake components to build out a mock robot and explore how to use Viam.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think the next sentence actually says it better

In this tutorial, you will set up, control, and program a mock robotic arm and a mock sub-part with a motor using fake components.

## Requirements

You'll need the following hardware and software for this tutorial:

- A laptop or desktop running Linux or macOS
- [Go](https://go.dev/doc/install) or [Python 3.9+](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- A code editor of your choice

> - If you are running macOS, ensure you have [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) installed and up to date on your Mac

Author: ```suggestion
```
Good call

## Set up a mock robot

### Make an account on the Viam app

The first thing you need to do is set up your account on the Viam app.
Go to [app.viam.com](https://app.viam.com) and sign up.

### Configure your mock robot

> Now you'll create a configuration file to represent your robot's hardware.

Author: ```suggestion
Now you'll [configure your robot](/manage/configuration) to represent your robot's hardware.
```

    - Create a new component called `myArm` with **Type** `arm` and **Model** `fake`.
    Click **Create component**.
    - Make your fake arm act like a [UR5e](https://www.universal-robots.com/products/ur5-robot/) by adding the following attribute:

      ```json
      {
          "arm-model": "ur5e"
      }
      ```

    The config panel should look like this:

    ![A fake arm being configured in Builder mode in the Viam app config tab.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/create-arm.png)
    - Click **Save config**.

6. Configure a [fake motor component](../../../components/motor/fake):

   - Create a new component called `myMotor` with **Type** `motor` and **Model** `fake`.
     Click **Create component**.
   - Most motors are wired to a board which sends them signals.
   Even though your motor is fake, make it more realistic by assigning it a `board`.
   Select `myBoard` from the **board** drop-down.

7. Click **Save config**.

You will need to reference the component names later when you connect to your mock robot with the Python SDK.

### Install `viam-server` on your computer

Before you proceed with controlling your mock robot, you need to install `viam-server`.

> Follow the steps outlined on the **Setup** tab of the Viam app to install `viam-server` on your computer.

Author: Hmm I thought about it but the Setup tab actually has that link, so I think it's better not to link them to the complex version when they can just use the setup tab and see the link there if they need it. I can add the config link though!

## Control your mock robot using the Viam app

When you add components to your robot, the Viam app automatically generates a UI for your board, motor and arm under the **Control** tab.

![Screenshot from the Viam app showing the CONTROL tab with the fake arm, and motor components.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/control-tab.png)

> If you configured real components, you would be able to control them from this section of the app.

Reviewer 2: This feels a bit like we're repeatedly pointing out that really real components would be better to test with - and then it's not actually a good way to explore. I think putting first what they can do and see would be the better approach and then framing it more as "With real components, you would also be able to" - will make this feel better.

> If you configured real components, you would be able to control them from this section of the app.

Author: Okay changing!

You could do things like control the direction and speed of the motor, and change the joint positions of your robotic arm.
However, since you are using fake components, you will only see the robot's reported positions and speeds change from the UI.

> You will not be able to see your robot move in the physical world.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I think that's superfluous

> Next, you will install a Viam SDK (software development kit) so you can write custom logic to control the mock robot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, install a Viam SDK (software development kit) so you can write custom logic to control the mock robot.
```

Refer to the appropriate SDK documentation for SDK installation instructions:

- [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/)
- [Viam Go SDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/tree/main/robot/client)

### Connect to your mock robot with your code

The easiest way to get started writing an application with Viam's SDKs is to use the boilerplate code on the **Code Sample** tab.

Navigate to your [robot's page on the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/robots), select the **Code Sample** tab, and select your SDK language (**Python** or **Golang**).
Copy the boilerplate code.
This code snippets imports all the necessary libraries, is pre-populated with your robot credentials, and sets up a connection with the Viam app in the cloud.
Next, paste that boilerplate code into a file named <file>index.py</file> or <file>index.go</file> in your code editor, and save your file locally.

{{< readfile "/static/include/snippet/secret-share.md" >}}

You can now run the code.
Doing so verifies that the Viam SDK is properly installed, that the `viam-server` instance on your robot is live, and that the computer running the program is able to connect to that instance.

> Run your code by typing the following into the terminal on your computer:

Reviewer 2: you'd need to still hit enter
```suggestion
Run your code by entering the following into the terminal on your computer:
```

Author: good point

Author: I mean the Setup tab tells them to but I should probably clarify within the tutorial itself.

> Run your code by typing the following into the terminal on your computer:

Author: ```suggestion
Open another terminal window on your computer.
Run your code by entering the following command into the terminal:
```

If you successfully configured your robot and it is able to connect to the Viam app you should see something like this printed to the terminal after running your program.
What you see here is a list of the various resources (Like components, and services) that have been configured to your robot in the Viam app.

![Command line output from running python3 index.py when your Raspberry Pi has correctly connected and initialized with the Viam app. The output is an array of resources that have been pulled from the Viam app. The list includes the Motion Service, arm component, data manager, board component and motor component. There is also a list of arm position and orientation values.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/resource-output.png)

### Control your mock robot

> Next, you will write some code to control and move your mock robotic arm.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering whether it would be better to either change these statements to imperative (`Next, write...`) or use `can` instead (`Next, you can`). I feel like that leaves more agency with the reader?

Reviewer 2: That's fine I think

You will write a program that moves the mock robotic arm to a new random position every second.
You will be able to verify that your mock robotic arm is working by checking that the joint positions of the fake arm in the **Control** tab of the Viam app are changing.

At the top of your <file>index.py</file> file, paste the following:

> {{< tabs >}}

Reviewer 2: this is an annoying change but can you make the tabs be all of the content for this section so that people only have to switch tabs once?

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Now when you run this code, you should see the new mock arm positions listed in the command line.
Open the **Control** tab of your mock robot to see the robot's arm positions changing in real-time along with the code on your development machine.

> <!-- We could replace this GIF but putting in an image for now

Author: Okay I can do that

<div class="td-max-width-on-larger-screens">
  {{<gif webm_src="../../img/build-a-mock-robot/image2.webm" mp4_src="../../img/build-a-mock-robot/image2.mp4" alt="A terminal window with 'python3 index.py' being run, then a list of four values is printed each second to the terminal. On the left side, is the mock arm from the CONTROL tab of the Viam app. As the joint positions are updated in the terminal from the left, you can see that the joint positions are updated in realtime on the Viam app.">}}
</div>
-->

![Screenshot of the terminal output and the arm portion of the Control tab showing the arm joint positions. The Control tab positions match the most recent code output values.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/joint-positions.png)

## Create a mock sub-part

Now that you have your mock robotic arm working, add a mock sub-part to your robot.

### What is a part?

> A [_robot_](../../../manage/fleet/robots/) in Viam is one or more computers combined into one logical robot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="robot" text="robot" >}}_ in Viam is one or more computers combined into one logical unit.
```
is -> consists of?

Author: ```suggestion
A _{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="robot" text="robot" >}}_ in Viam consists of one or more computers combined into one logical unit.
```

![Screenshot of the Viam app with a dropdown below the main part. 'SubPart' is written in the textbox.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/part-menu.png)

Navigate to your new sub-part's **Config** tab and create a new motor using the **fake** model.
Name it `"motor2"`.

![The config tab of the sub-part. A new motor component called motor2 is being created.](../../img/build-a-mock-robot/sub-part-motor.png)

Click **Create component** and then **Save config**.

### Start a new instance of `viam-server` for your mock sub-part

Every part needs to run an instance of `viam-server`.
Typically, a sub-part would represent a separate computer running `viam-server`.
For this tutorial since you are using only one computer, you will need to bind the sub-part to a new port so you can run two servers on your machine at the same time.
The following instructions use port `8081`, but you can use any open port you want.

1. Go to the **Config** tab and then go to the **Auth/Network** sub-tab.
2. Under **Network** click **Add bind address**.
3. In the **Host** field type `localhost`.
4. In the **Port** field type `8081`.
5. Click **Save config**.

> ### Run a second instance of `viam-server` for your sub-part

Reviewer 2: need to point out that this happens on a third tab

Author: done

{{<video webm_src="../../img/build-a-mock-robot/go-start-demo.webm" mp4_src="../../img/build-a-mock-robot/go-start-demo.mp4" alt="Code runs and prints resource list">}}

## Next steps

In this tutorial, we showed you how to set up a mock robot with a sub-part so that you can learn more about using fake components, setting up a local development environment, and writing code using a Viam SDK.

> If you're ready to get started with building robots with real hardware components, you should pick up a [board](/components/board/) and try building one of Viam's [introductory robots](/tutorials/#your-first-robots).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're ready to get started with building robots with real hardware components, pick up a [board](/components/board/) and try building one of Viam's [introductory robots](/tutorials/#your-first-robots).
```
